# W2D4

## Recursive Factorial Notes
[Recursion](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Recursion) is when a **method calls itself**. In coding, it is using the same method over and over to solve a problem.

Having a method completely calling itself over and over will create a **SystemStackError: stack level too deep**. This is why when creating a recursive method, there should be two criterias:

  * The **base case**: Where we halt the recursion by not making a further call. (could have multiple base cases)

  * The **recursive step** where we continue the recursion by making another subsequent call.

## Recursive Factorial Notes
The factorial problem can be solved recursively. The structure of factorial has us take decreasing numbers and multiply them together. The factorial pattern looks like this:

```ruby
factorial(5) = 5 * 4 * 3 * 2 * 1
factorial(4) = 4 * 3 * 2 * 1
factorial(3) = 3 * 2 * 1
factorial(2) = 2 * 1
factorial(1) = 1 (base case)
```

The input becomes smaller and smaller when the number becomes smaller. Thus factorial can be solved by first returning the base case, when we reach it and then multiplying n by a factorial(n-1) each time.

```ruby
def factorial(n)
  return n if n == 1
  n * factorial(n-1)
end
```

The rules of solving a problem recursively:
  1. Identify the base case in the problem and code it. The base case should explicitly handle scenario(s) where the arguments are trivially "small", that we immediately know the result without further calculation.
  2. Solve the next level of the problem, using the result of the base case.
  3. Modify the code in step 2, generalizing it for every level of the problem.

## Recursive Fib Notes
The fibonacci sequence can also be done recursively. The fibonacci sequence is shown below:

```ruby
fib(1) # => 1
fib(2) # => 1
fib(3) # => 2
fib(4) # => 3
fib(5) # => 5
fib(6) # => 8
fib(7) # => 13
```

To get a fibonacci number, we need to take the sum of the previous two fibonacci numbers so we can describe fib this way:

```ruby
fib(5) = fib(4) + fib(3)
fib(4) = fib(3) + fib(2)
fib(3) = fib(2) + fib(1)
fib(2) = 1 base case
fib(1) = 1 base case
```

The recursive code for fibonacci would be:

```ruby
def fib(n)
  return 1 if n == 1 || n == 2    #base case
  fib(n-1)+fib(n-2)               #recursion step
end
```

Recursion allows us to solve problems in an elegant way but should not be used for every problem. **Recursion is used to solve problems that cna be decomposed into smaller versions of the** *same* **problem**.

## Spaceship Operator Notes
We can use the spaceship operator **<=>** to compare two values. The spaceship operator works differently compared to the basic comparators of <, >, <=, >=. 

The spaceship operator is used between two values and will return -1, 0, 1. The behavior is as follows: 
  * Given the expression a <=> b
    * it will return -1 if a is less than b
    * it will return 0 if a is equal to b
    * it will return 1 if a is greater than to b

```ruby
7 <=> 2   #=> 1
7 <=> 7   #=> 0
2 <=> 7   #=> -1
10 <=> 2  #=> 1
-5 <=> 10 #=> -1
-3 <=> -9 #=> 1
```

## Nil as Falsey Notes
The || method can be used on non-boolean values to return something. Every value in Ruby is treated as true (truthy) or as false (falsey).

### Truthy and Falsey Values
Remember the values that are truthy and which are falsey:
  * nil and false are the only falsey values
  * everything else is truthy

We can use nil to act as false in scenarios that traditionally require a boolean:

```ruby
val = nil
if val
    p "it is true"
else 
    p "it is false"
end
```

### What does logical OR really do?
The || operator is used in this way:
  * when a is truthy, return a
  * when a is falsey, return b
  * when a is falsey and b is falsey, it will return b

```ruby
true || 42        #true
42 || true        #42
false || 42       #42
42 || false       #42
false || "hello"  #"hello"
nil || "hello"    #"hello"
"hi" || "hello"   #"hi"
0 || true         #0
false || nil      #nil
```

### Default Arguments
Using the evaluation of || is useful when implementing default arguments for our methods:

```ruby
def great(person = nil)
  if person.nil?
    person = "you"
  end

  p "Hey " + person 
end

p greet("Brian)       #=> "Hey Brian"
p greet               #=> "Hey you"
```

The above statement can be refactored using || to make it simpilar.

```ruby
def greet(person = nil)
  person = person || "you"
  p "Hey " + person
end

p greet("Brian)       #=> "Hey Brian"
p greet               #=> "Hey you"
```

This code can be refactored even more by using ||= in place of ||. This is like writing a ||=b in place of a = a || b.

```ruby
def greet(person = nil)
  person ||= "you"
  p "Hey " + person
end

p greet("Brian)       #=> "Hey Brian"
p greet               #=> "Hey you"
```

### Default Procs
The ||= pattern is utilized heavily when implemening default procs:

```ruby
def call_that_proc(val, &prc)
    prc ||= Proc.new { |data| data.upcase + "!!" }
    prc.call(val)
end

p call_that_proc("hey")                                             # => "HEY!!"
p call_that_proc("programmers") { |data| data * 3 }                 # => "programmersprogrammersprogrammers"
p call_that_proc("code") { |data| "--" + data.capitalize + "--"}    # => "--Code--"
```

The above prc does not need to explicity be assigned to nil because prc will automatically contain nil if the method is called without passing in a proc.

### Lazy Initialization
The ||= pattern can also be useful when implementing **Lazy Initialization** for classes. Lazy initialization is a design strategy where we delay creation of an object until it is need. 

For example if we have a class resturant which takes in a name and chefs method as well as a menu method we could use ||= to assign a random menu if we do not want to have one set up. This helps assigning things a lot quicker than having to create a menu for each instance of resturant.

```ruby
class Restaurant
    attr_accessor :name, :chefs, :menu

    def initialize(name, chefs)
        @name = name
        @chefs = chefs
    end

    def menu
        @menu ||= ["sammies", "big ol' cookies", "bean blankies", "chicky catch", "super water"]
    end
end

five_star_restaurant = Restaurant.new("Appetizer Academy", ["Marta", "Jon", "Soon-Mi"])

p five_star_restaurant
#<Restaurant:0x00007f90b3922368 
# @name="Appetizer Academy",
# @chefs=["Marta", "Jon", "Soon-Mi"]
#>

p five_star_restaurant.menu
#["sammies", "big ol' cookies", "bean blankies", "chicky catch", "super water"]

p five_star_restaurant
#<Restaurant:0x00007f90b3922368
# @name="Appetizer Academy", 
# @chefs=["Marta", "Jon", "Soon-Mi"],
# @menu=["sammies", "big ol' cookies", "bean blankies", "chicky catch", "super water"]
#>
```

The menu will only appear when we use #menu method otherwise the restaurant will be initialized without the menu. Once we call the #menu method on our restaurant instance it will be there once we call the instance again.