# W3D1

**Table of Contents**
* [Nontechnical Overview of Ruby](#nontechnical-overview-of-ruby)
  * [Dynamic](#dynamic)
  * [Reflective](#reflective)
  * [Object-oriented](#object-oriented)
  * [Multi-Paradigm](#multi-paradigm)
  * [Ruby vs. Python](#ruby-vs-python)
  * [Vocabulary](#vocabulary)
* [Debugging](#debugging)
  * [Rule #1: Read the error](#rule-1-read-the-error)
  * [Perform a Mental Stack Trace](#perform-a-mental-stack-trace)
  * [Pay technical debt](#pay-technical-debt)
  * [Don't read the source code](#dont-read-the-source)
  * [Use a REPL to isolate the problem](#use-a-repl-to-isolate-the-problem)
  * [Use a debugger to zero in on the problem](#use-a-debugger-to-zero-in-on-the-problem)
  * [Step through code](#step-through-code)
* [Common Exceptions](#common-exceptions)
  * [NameError](#nameerror)
  * [ArgumentError: wrong number of arguments](#argumenterror-wrong-number-of-arguments)
  * [TypeError](#typeerror)
  * [LoadError](#loaderror)
  * [SyntaxError](#syntaxerror)

## Nontechnical Overview of Ruby
Ruby is dynamic, reflective, object-oriented and multi-paradigm.

### Dynamic
A dynamic programming language is one that can execute many common programming behaviors at **runtime**, compared to a static programming language that performs during **compilation**. 

Dynamic programming languages can compile code at runtime and execute code during compile-time. This enables metaprogramming, more abstraction, and less code, but comes at the expense of execution speed.

Ruby is also dynamically typed. In dynamically typed languages, the language enforces type constraints at runtime; whereas, in statically typed languages, the language enforces type constraints at compile-time.

* Terms to know:
  - **Runtime** is the period of time when a program is running and generally occurs after compile time.
  - **Compile time** is the period when the programming code is converted to machine code (i.e. binary code).

### Reflective
Reflection is common among dynamic programming languages. Reflection refers to the ability of a program to manipulate its own structure and behavior as data.

In Ruby, reflection permits the examination of classes, modules, methods, instantion and method invocation. Reflection makes much of metaprogramming possible.

* Terms to know:
  - **Type introspection** is the ability of a program to examine the type of properties of an object at runtime.
  - **Reflection** is the ability of a program to examine, introspect, and modify its own structure and behavior.

### Object-oriented
Object-oriented programming is a programming paradigm that privileges objects rather than actions and data rather than functions or logic.

The most popular object-oriented languages are class-based. Objects are instances of classes which usually determine type. Classes define the data format and methods available to their instances or to themselves.

Classes often inherit from other classes in an "is-a-type-of" relationship. A class might inherit from a superclass, meaning it might inherit data definitions and methods which allows for recycling. The class may overwrite some defintions and methods as well as add its own, thereby customizing and extending from the superclass.

### Multi-paradigm
Ruby also supports procedural and functional programming.

In procedural programming, the programmer specifies a series of procedures that operate on data structures in systematic order. 

Functional programming privileges pure functions, those whose return value is only determined by the input, without side effects such as changes in state.

### Ruby vs. Python
Python is perhaps the most similar language to Ruby. Both are dynamic, reflective, object-oriented, multi-paradigm scripting languages. They even use similar syntax! Here are some differences:

1. Python doesn't support blocks.
2. Python has a richer set of data structures.
3. Python is inflexible: there's one best way of doing things!
4. Whitespace is syntactically significant in Python.
5. Python is less object-oriented. It has primitive data types, which are more fundamental than objects (not everything in Python is an object!), and many of its object-oriented features were late additions.
6. Ruby values elegance and "magic" over clarity. Comparison of dates from both languages below:

```ruby
# RUBY
require 'active_support/all'
1.month.from_now
```

```python
# PYTHON
from datetime import datetime
from dateuntil.relativedelta import relativedelta
new_time = datetime.now() + relativedelta(months=1)
```

### Vocabulary
* **Test-Driven Development (TDD)**
  * TDD is a process for writing software. It's process goes like this:
    1. Add a test
    2. Run all the tets and make sure the new test fails
    3. Write code
    4. Run all the tests and make sure the new test passes
    5. Refactor the code

* **Behavior-Driven Development (BDD)**
  * BDD is an extension of TDD. It structures the testing process through the use of user stories - a description of the user's use of the feature being developed. The goal is to allow the user story to help notify the developer on what it should test and not test.

* **Unit Test**
  * Unit tests breaks the application down to its smallest parts and testing each part in isolation. It uses mock objects to make sure that problems elsewhere in the code won't cause the test to mistakenly fail.

* **Integration Test**
  * Integration testing combines units of code and their interactions are tested. This is done after each individual component has been tested.

* **Test Coverage**
  * Test coverage refers to how much of a software program has been tested.

## Debugging
Any program of sufficient complexity is unlikely to work the first time. You will make mistakes. Skill and unskilled developers write a similar number of bugs. The difference is that skilled developers are able to quickly identify and fix bugs.

### Rule #1: Read the error
Always read the error. Oftentimes it tells you everything you need to know. The error gives you valuable pieces of information. The first three are absolutely essential to read and understand whenever an error occurs.
  * Error type
  * Error message
  * Line number on which the error occurred
  * Chain of methods that were called leading up to it (referred to as the **stack trace**)

### Perform a Mental Stack Trace
The stack trace below the error message will tell you the path your program took to get to wherever the error happened.

Whenever you encounter a bug your ability to track it down will be dependent on your ability to trace the logic of your own code. Always try and ask questions about what is causing the bugs in your code.

If you do not understand why the error is happening, try to:
  * Break your code down into more testable chunks and actively run each of those chunks to test if they're working.
  * Use **p** statements often; use them to check what the values of variables are, that methods are called as expected, etc.
  * Use the debugger.

### Pay technical debt
If you encounter buggy code that is poorly decomposed into methods, **fix the design immediately**. You are going to want to fix the design eventually anyways; refactoring will probably create new bugs to fix, so you might as well deal with bugs at the same time.

In the rush to complete projects, bad design is sometimes a compromise made to finish a project on-time. This is called *technical debt*. It's okay to take out debt like this, just like it's okay to take out financial debt. But the more debt you take out, the higher the payments in the form of your time.

### Don't read the source
Do not read the source to find the problem. If you are debugging try to look at the source to familiarize yourself with the code but never look at the source to try and fix errors. There are many better ways to fixing errors than looking at the source.

### Use a REPL to isolate the problem
We can use pry to run our code and solve errors in it. If you find a *regression*; an input which produces the wrong output you can figure out where the problem lies. Decomposition for the win.

### Use a debugger to zero in on the problem
Byebug lets us do many cool things. We can step through our code one line at a time, and along the way...
* check the value of our variables at any time (no p required!)
* continuously watch the value of a variable, so that we can see when it changes
* change the value of variables in the middle of program execution
* set breakpoints so that we can pause whenever we reach a certain line in our code
* examine the call stack to determine exactly which methods brought us to a certain line of code
* execute short snippets of code to test an idea (just like in pry or irb)

### Step through code
Once you've isolated a bug to a small amount of code, you can drop debuggers into your code to uncover the problem. 
* **require 'byebug'**: allows you to use byebug in your code
* **debugger**: apply to where you want to fix your code
* **step** (or **s**): used to step into the method call
* **next** (or **n**): used to advance each line of your methods
* **continue** (or **c**): used to tell the debugger to keep running the code
* **exit** followed by **y**: to quit byebug
* You can type variables into byebug to know what the variable is equal to at that time

## Common Exceptions
There are several exceptions that frequently come up. They can be mysterious at first. Exceptions are trying to tell you what went wrong, so being able to understand them is important.

### NameError
A **NameError** exception is thrown when you try to use a variale or method that hasen't been defined.

  * **Uninitialized Constant** is a variation of the standard NameError. It means Ruby is trying to find a class/constant but did not find it. This could be because of a class name typo, or often because we forget to **require** the Ruby file that loads the class.

  * **NoMethodError** is a subclass of NameError. This is thrown when the user calls a method that does not exist. A common error occurs when a variable is **nil** when we don't expect it.

### ArgumentError: wrong number of arguments
If we don't give a method the right number of arguments, we will get an ArgumentError.

### TypeError
A TypeError may be thrown if you pass the wrong type of thing to a method. This error normally occurs when a method is called with the wrong types of things.

### LoadError
Load erros are common. There are two very common causes. Sometimes you are trying to load a file that is provided by a gem, but the gem is not installed yet. Another common cause is that you are trying to load another source file in your project, but the initial './' is forgotten.

### SyntaxError
Writing ungrammatical Ruby code will net you a SyntaxError. This tells you that Ruby didn't understand your code.

There are lots of sources of syntax errors. The most common are forgetting to close quotes, parentheses, or do-end blocks.