# W3D1

**Table of Contents**
* [Nontechnical Overview of Ruby](#nontechnical-overview-of-ruby)
  * [Dynamic](#dynamic)
  * [Reflective](#reflective)
  * [Object-oriented](#object-oriented)
  * [Multi-Paradigm](#multi-paradigm)
  * [Ruby vs. Python](#ruby-vs-python)
  * [Vocabulary](#vocabulary)

## Nontechnical Overview of Ruby
Ruby is dynamic, reflective, object-oriented and multi-paradigm.

### Dynamic
A dynamic programming language is one that can execute many common programming behaviors at **runtime**, compared to a static programming language that performs during **compilation**. 

Dynamic programming languages can compile code at runtime and execute code during compile-time. This enables metaprogramming, more abstraction, and less code, but comes at the expense of execution speed.

Ruby is also dynamically typed. In dynamically typed languages, the language enforces type constraints at runtime; whereas, in statically typed languages, the language enforces type constraints at compile-time.

* Terms to know:
  - **Runtime** is the period of time when a program is running and generally occurs after compile time.
  - **Compile time** is the period when the programming code is converted to machine code (i.e. binary code).

### Reflective
Reflection is common among dynamic programming languages. Reflection refers to the ability of a program to manipulate its own structure and behavior as data.

In Ruby, reflection permits the examination of classes, modules, methods, instantion and method invocation. Reflection makes much of metaprogramming possible.

* Terms to know:
  - **Type introspection** is the ability of a program to examine the type of properties of an object at runtime.
  - **Reflection** is the ability of a program to examine, introspect, and modify its own structure and behavior.

### Object-oriented
Object-oriented programming is a programming paradigm that privileges objects rather than actions and data rather than functions or logic.

The most popular object-oriented languages are class-based. Objects are instances of classes which usually determine type. Classes define the data format and methods available to their instances or to themselves.

Classes often inherit from other classes in an "is-a-type-of" relationship. A class might inherit from a superclass, meaning it might inherit data definitions and methods which allows for recycling. The class may overwrite some defintions and methods as well as add its own, thereby customizing and extending from the superclass.

### Multi-paradigm
Ruby also supports procedural and functional programming.

In procedural programming, the programmer specifies a series of procedures that operate on data structures in systematic order. 

Functional programming privileges pure functions, those whose return value is only determined by the input, without side effects such as changes in state.

### Ruby vs. Python
Python is perhaps the most similar language to Ruby. Both are dynamic, reflective, object-oriented, multi-paradigm scripting languages. They even use similar syntax! Here are some differences:

1. Python doesn't support blocks.
2. Python has a richer set of data structures.
3. Python is inflexible: there's one best way of doing things!
4. Whitespace is syntactically significant in Python.
5. Python is less object-oriented. It has primitive data types, which are more fundamental than objects (not everything in Python is an object!), and many of its object-oriented features were late additions.
6. Ruby values elegance and "magic" over clarity. Comparison of dates from both languages below:

```ruby
# RUBY
require 'active_support/all'
1.month.from_now
```

```python
# PYTHON
from datetime import datetime
from dateuntil.relativedelta import relativedelta
new_time = datetime.now() + relativedelta(months=1)
```

### Vocabulary
**Test-Driven Development (TDD)**
TDD is a process for writing software.
1. Add a test
2. Run all the tets and make sure the new test fails
3. Write code
4. Run all the tests and make sure the new test passes
5. Refactor the code

**Behavior-Driven Development (BDD)**
BDD is an extension of TDD. It structures the testing process through the use of user stories - a description of the user's use of the feature being developed. The goal is to allow the user story to help notify the developer on what it should test and not test.

**Unit Test**
Unit tests breaks the application down to its smallest parts and testing each part in isolation. It uses mock objects to make sure that problems elsewhere in the code won't cause the test to mistakenly fail.

**Integration Test**
Integration testing combines units of code and their interactions are tested. This is done after each individual component has been tested.

**Test Coverage**
Test coverage refers to how much of a software program has been tested.